By Den Seed, the AI lab from Bite Dense
that also owns Doing and Tik Tok, is
already on its way to become the top
Chinese AI labs, outpacing Deep Seek
even. Not only have they proposed some
of the most cuttingedge concepts and
papers of the past few months, but they
also have budgets magnitudes larger than
Deep Seeks and has the capacity to
potentially compete head-to-head with
Google and OpenAI. The first proof is
their video model CEN 1.0 outperforming
the new VO3 from Google. Yes, the one
that generates both video and audio and
has taken the world by storm on the
video generation arena leaderboard right
under everyone's noses. And aside from
this state-of-the-art performance, their
research papers are also goat mine
themselves. There are just way too many
to choose from. And in the next few
weeks, I'll probably be covering even
more of them. But first, let's start
with this old concept they have brought
back to life called model merging. Back
in the days where I make image
generation content, you probably
remember how model merging was used in
the UNET to combine different styles and
create cool new models. But for LM,
model merging is something much less
talked about. I mean, there's still
quite a handful of papers on model
merging in the post-training stages,
many of which you can find using my
website findmyapers.ai.
But for something much more fundamental,
like merging during pre-training, it
remains relatively uncommon. Even though
Deep Seek V3 and Llama 3.1 both
mentioned using model merging in
pre-training, the detailed methodologies
were actually never published. And what
may be the reason why model merging
papers are rare is because pre-training
experiments are a lot more expensive to
conduct. Independent or even small
research labs would struggle to properly
evaluate model merging because it's just
so goddamn expensive to run a single
training run from scratch if you don't
own the GPUs. And let's say you want to
test it on a 70B model. It'll probably
cost like at least 2 million per one
training run at market price. Then
running that experiment multiple times
just to prove a point would be
incredibly costly. On top of that, who
knows if model merging in the
pre-training stage would even matter. So
one, it's too risky to run an experiment
that could cost tens of millions with no
guaranteed improvements. And two, if you
did conduct one and publish it, you will
be handing free information to all your
competitors, which is the antithesis of
what top AI labs do. Except by then
seed, I guess in their paper, model
merging in pre-training of LLM, they
essentially spend millions to train
these models while teaching everyone how
to save millions. Not only did they show
how to obtain accurate scaling law
predictions for your own pre-training
using model merging and that it provides
a free performance boost, but they also
propose methods to salvage training if
something goes wrong mid-training. And
before we dive into how they discover
all this, we all know how difficult
setting up a model training run can get,
especially if you have to secure GPU
servers for that. So this is where
RunPod comes in. They offer serverless
services on top of their new runpod hub
to make deployment even faster. With
serverless, it basically takes away the
abstraction of server management by
letting developers deploy code that
would automatically scale with different
GPUs and run without the need to
maintain the infrastructure. As for
runpods hub, it allows you to deploy
ready to run AI repositories with only
one click. So if you want to set up a
training run, you can just simply go to
runpod hub, click on axelot fine-tuning,
deploy it, copy or modify these few
lines of code, and you have a server up
where you can run a model at scale and
fine-tune it however you like. Beside
Axelot, you can also choose from all
kinds of other AI repositories that
require some decent GPU power, ranging
from Comfy UI, Olama worker, automatic
111, face swap, deodify, real ESR GAN,
and more. You can also upload your own
AI repository and create a serverless
endpoint based on that. But why I think
it's the most exciting is that RunPod is
rolling out a revenue share program for
hub creators. That means soon if your
repository gets listed on the hub,
you'll be able to earn money every time
someone deploys it. And I think it's a
great way to support open source
projects. while getting rewarded at the
same time. On top of that, there is
nothing else like this in the market
right now. So, if you want to get
started with RunPod, check them out
using a link down description. And thank
you, RunPod for sponsoring this video.
Anyways, this model merging paper
answers many questions about optimal
pre-training, but first, let's cover the
basics. A typical pre-training cycle
follows a warm-up stable decay schedule.
The learning rate starts with a brief
warm-up period, then enters a long
stable phase at a constant rate, and
finally moves into a kneeling where the
rate is gradually reduced, usually
through cosine or linear decay, to
fine-tune the parameters and settle the
model down. Their model merging process
works like this. They save checkpoints
at fixed token intervals. Afterwards,
they average all those snapshots into
one model. And surprisingly, this merge
model will be able to reflect the
performance you'd get after full
annealing, letting you preview final
quality while saving 3 to 6 days of
training in about 15% of your compute
budget. Pretty neat, right? They named
this method PMA, short for pre-trained
model averaging, which is a novel
strategy for model level weight merging
during pre-training. They demonstrated
it on dense models ranging from 411
million to 70 billion parameters as well
as mixture of experts architecture with
parameters ranging from 0.7B active and
7B total to 20B active and 200B total.
That's eight dense models in total
including the baselines and also eighte
models including the baseline which
could cost up to $15 million in GPU
time. This finding then raised an
interesting question. Can't we just skip
the analing phase completely? Well,
according to the experiments in this
paper, model merging all the weights
during the constant learning rate phase
can pretty much outperform an annealed
model immediately. Only after about 1.5
trillion tokens of analing does the
annealed model catch up. The only
potential drawback I can imagine is if
analing continues its performance gains
beyond the token budget they tested.
Since model merging's gains are
relatively flat, analing could
eventually surpass it. Right? Because if
you look at this trajectory, a kneeling
the model might surpass merging the
models with the constant learning rate
when enough extra training is invested.
But justifying that extra compute until
a new outperformance merging might be
difficult for some. And in this paper's
case, using a 1.3b active and 13b total
parameter model would cost an extra 20k
for the annealed model just to get to
the merge models performance. So it can
be skipped, but I wish they had tested
it over even more tokens. Maybe they
should have applied a kneeling to the
merge checkpoints to see if that yields
an even larger boost, but that kind of
wouldn't make sense, which I'll get to
later. And I still haven't addressed how
frequently the intervals are for saving
the checkpoints. So, in practice,
researchers found that the optimal
interval scales with model size. This
scaling also aligns with the tendency
for larger models that would usually use
larger batch sizes. As for how complex
model merging has to be, the paper
tested three methods. Simple moving
average, where all checkpoints are
equally merged. the exponential moving
average where earlier checkpoints are
exponentially downweighted and weighted
moving average where earlier checkpoints
receive linearly decreasing weight and
the best performer turns out to be the
simplest method SMA. But in hindsight,
wouldn't EMA and WMA be better while as
training progresses, checkpoints
naturally converge closer together. EMA
and WMA would then upweight these low
variance late checkpoints that would
contribute barely any new information.
In contrast, SMA would preserve useful
variance that is in the earlier phase of
training. So even though all three
methods converge to essentially the same
point by the end, SMA's simple
implementation and full window averaging
makes it the better choice. But that
still doesn't explain why model merging
works so well that it can predict a
kneeling performance, right? Well, think
of the weights during the constant
learning rate phase like a noisy signal
with high frequency oscillation that
slowly drifts towards the optimal point.
And what a kneeling basically does is
that it dampens those oscillations
iteratively like a low pass filter. And
here comes the interesting part. SMA
overequally spaced checkpoints does
virtually the same thing but in one
shot. It directly removes the high
frequency jitter and leaves you with
this smooth low frequency like component
by cancelling out the positive and
negative deviations across the window
all at once, achieving a similar effect
without ever changing the learning rate.
as SMA basically reconstructs the weight
vector you get after a full decay
schedule and in their 2D weight contour
plot with MMLU accuracy as the contour
individual checkpoints from the
intervals during pre-training would form
a scattered ring around the basin while
the merged point sits right at the peak
visualizing the low pass filter
intuition and how it averages out the
noise. So theoretically applying
dampening twice, first with checkpoint
averaging and then again through an
learning rate decay seems redundant
since both mechanisms aim to remove
highfrequency noise from the weight
trajectory. But of course in practice
they are not perfectly equivalent. So a
kneeling still has the power to push
that already smooth model a bit closer
to the optimum. It's just that we
wouldn't know how much the performance
gain would be and we wouldn't know if
it'll be worth it or not as this paper
did not experiment on this. So yeah,
model merging is great, but when exactly
do you use it? Well, in a nutshell, PMA
is a cost- reducing technique for model
pre-training that provides early
performance estimates, small but free
reliable accuracy gains of 3 to 7%, and
resilience to instability. So if you're
doing a hyperparameter sweep or testing
a scaling law hypothesis, model merging
can potentially save you 10 to 20% of
your budget and time. I can also imagine
PMA stabilization property being really
useful for crash recovery. Like if a
loss spike derails your run, merging the
last few stable checkpoints will often
reset you back on track. And it helps
stabilizing noisy setups like a large
batch or mixed precision training which
can cause very spiky iterations. This
could be pretty big for distributed
compute too. Maybe something like
periodic checkpoint averaging which can
smooth out model noise across multiple
different copies of the same model on
multiple different workers. So yes, the
conclusion is the merging property of
PM8 is just really flexible. So, with
the pre-training era not being
completely over, as suggested by Chinese
researchers smuggling ADTP of data to
Malaysia to train AI models, this paper
is probably going to make a pretty big
impact on the fundamental level in a
very low-key way. And if you want to
keep up with research like this, you
should definitely check out my
newsletter where I cover the latest and
the juiciest AI research weekly. On
there, you'll be up to date on some of
the best papers published from the
previous week. And now, we have a
premium version where I recap 50 plus
papers monthly. So if that's your cup of
tea, join 10K other readers now at
mail.bbycloud.ai.
And thank you guys for watching. A big
shout out to Andrew Lasellius, Chris
Leoo, Degan Gan, News Research, Kanan,
Robert Zaviasa, Leis Muk, Ben Shainer,
Marcelo Ferraria, Zay Sheep, Poof, and
Enu DX Research Group, and many others
that support me through Patreon or
YouTube. Follow me on Twitter if you
haven't and I'll see youall in the next